Regex literal pitch (#12)
apple/swift-experimental-string-processing: Documentation/Evolution/RegexLiteralPitch.md

# Regular Expression Literals

- Authors: Hamish Knight, Michael Ilseman

## Introduction

We propose to introduce a first-class regular expression literal into the language that can take advantage of library support to offer extensible, powerful, and familiar textual pattern matching.

This is a component of a larger string processing picture. We would like to start a focused discussion surrounding our approach to the literal itself, while acknowledging that evaluating the utility of the literal will ultimately depend on the whole picture (e.g. supporting API). To aid this focused discussion, details such as the representation of captures in the type system, semantic details, extensions to lexing/parsing, additional API, etc., are out of scope of this pitch and thread. Feel free to continue discussion of anything related in the [overview thread][overview].

## Motivation

> Regular expressions are a ubiquitous, familiar, and concise syntax for matching text that satisfies a particular format, and extracting subranges from the match that contain interesting information. Syntactically, a regex literal in Swift should:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regular expressions are a ubiquitous, familiar, and concise syntax for matching and extracting text that satisfies a particular pattern. Syntactically, a regex literal in Swift should:
```

> - Leverage broader familiarity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be familiar and facilitate knowledge reuse
```

- Fit in with Swift's library extensibility story for literals (e.g. [`ExpressibleByStringInterpolation`][stringinterpolation])

> - Address source-destabilizing changes such as the parsing of delimiters

Reviewer: I was confused by this bullet until I read on further, I could tell if it was talking about how Swift regular expression should support the parsing of delimiters (like matching parenthesis or quotation marks), but this is about the source-breaking implications of using `/` as the delimiter.

I think we can just delete this bullet since using the `/` isn't a motivation on its own—choosing `/` follows from the the underling motivation for Swift regex literals to be familiar.

Further motivation, examples, and discussion can be found in the [overview thread][overview].

## Proposed Solution

> We propose the introduction of a regular expression literal that supports [the PCRE syntax][PCRE], in addition to new standard library protocols `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` and `RegexLiteralProtocol` that allow for the customization of how the regex literal is interpreted, similar to the existing `ExpressibleByStringInterpolation` protocol for string literals with interpolations. The compiler will parse the PCRE syntax within a regex literal, synthesizing calls to corresponding builder methods. Types conforming to `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` will be able to provide a builder type that opts into supporting various regex constructs through the use of normal function declarations and `@available`.

Reviewer: Do we want to saying anything (not necessarily in this paragraph) about why we chose the PCRE syntax compared to any other flavor? (I have so little experience with the different flavors of Regex, I don't know if PCRE is self-evidently the right one for those in the know.)

Author: Makes sense to me, what do you think @milseman? As I understand it, our main motivation for choosing PCRE is the familiarity, is that correct?

> 

Author: Added a line for this, though not sure whether it fits with Kyle's feedback, what do you think?

## Detailed Design

A regular expression literal will introduced using `/` delimiters, within which the compiler will parse [PCRE regex syntax][PCRE]:

```swift

> let regex = /([0-9A-F]+\d)(?:\.\.([0-9A-F]+))?/

Reviewer 2: I updated with a new example, can you take a look?

  
  // __B4 == /\.\.([0-9A-F]+)/
  let __B1 = builder.literal("..")
  let __B2 = builder.customCharacterClass(["0"..."9", "A"..."F"])
  let __B3 = builder.oneOrMore(__B2)
  let __B3 = builder.captureGroup(__B3)
  let __B4 = builder.concatenate(__B1, __B3)
  
  // __C3 == /__A5(?:__B4)?/
  let __C1 = builder.group(__B4)
  let __C2 = builder.zeroOrOne(__C1)
  let __C3 = builder.concatenate(__A5, __C2)
  
  return T(regexLiteral: builder.finalize(__C3))
}()
```

Note the exact API being used here is out of scope for this pitch.

### The `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` and `RegexLiteralProtocol` protocols

New `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` and `RegexLiteralProtocol` protocols will be introduced to the standard library, and will serve a similar purpose to the existing literal protocols `ExpressibleByStringInterpolation` and `StringInterpolationProtocol`.

```swift
public protocol ExpressibleByRegexLiteral {
  associatedtype RegexLiteral : RegexLiteralProtocol = Regex
  init(regexLiteral: RegexLiteral)
}

public protocol RegexLiteralProtocol {
  init()
  
  // Informal builder requirements for building a regex literal
  // will be specified here.
}
```

> Types conforming to `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` will be able to provide a custom type that conforms to `RegexLiteralProtocol`, which will be used to build the resulting regex value. A default conforming type `Regex` will be provided by the standard library, the details of which are out of scope for this pitch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Types conforming to `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` will be able to provide a custom type that conforms to `RegexLiteralProtocol`, which will be used to build the resulting regex value. A default conforming type will be provided by the standard library (`Regex` here), but further details of that type are out of scope for this pitch.
```

> Giving conforming types the flexibility to provide their own regex handling logic allows for e.g additional linguistic-level processing to be built on top of regular expressions (e.g. using Unicode word-break iterators, collation and/or locale support, fuzzier matching, etc). It could also be used to provide regex types that call directly into `NSRegularExpression`, or other existing regex libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Libraries can extend regex handling logic for their domains. For example, a higher-level library could provide linguistically richer regular expressions by incorporate locale, collation, language dictionaries, and fuzzier matching. Similarly, a libraries wrapping different regex engines can support custom regex literals.
```

### Opting into certain regex features

> We intend for the compiler parsing logic to completely parse [the PCRE syntax][PCRE], however types conforming to `RegexLiteralProtocol` may not be able to handle the full regex grammar. To signal the features that they support, conforming types will be able to annotate builder functions with availability; which allows them to communicate the features they don't intend on supporting, in addition to the features they may support in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We intend for the compiler to completely parse [the PCRE syntax][PCRE]. However, types conforming to `RegexLiteralProtocol` might not be able to handle the full feature set. The compiler looks for corresponding function declarations inside `RegexLiteralProtocol` and will emit a compilation error if missing. Conforming types can use `@availability` on these function declarations to communicate versioning and add more support in the future.
```

Author: Just noticed this says `@availability` in code voice, should that be `@available`?

> This also would give the standard library the flexibility to roll out new regex features over time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The feature set initially supported by the standard library is outside the scope of this pitch. But, the approach of lookup combined with availability allows us to extend support over time.
```

### Impact of using `/` as the delimiter

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to start with the easy/benign and work forwards from there. So probably start with comment syntax, etc., which will also help the reader develop their syntactic reasoning.

```swift
let x = /0; let y = 1/
```

Should this be considered to be two `let` bindings, with each initialization expression using prefix and postfix `/` operators, or is it a single regex literal?

This also extends to more generally to prefix and postfix operators containing the `/` character, e.g:

```swift
let x = </<0; let y = 1</<
```
Is this a regex literal `/<0; let y = 1</` with a prefix and postfix `<` operator applied, or two `let` bindings each using prefix and postfix `</<` operators?

There are no easy ways of resolving these ambiguities, therefore a regex literal parsed with `/` delimiters will likely need to be introduced under a new language version mode, along with a deprecation of prefix and postfix operators that use the `/` character. In the new language version mode, the above examples will be parsed as regex literals.

#### On custom infix operators using the `/` character

There is also a conflict for infix operators containing `/` in cases where whitespace isn't used, for example:

```swift
x+/y/+z
```

Should the operators be parsed as `+/` and `/+` respectively, or should this be parsed as `x + /y/ + z`?

> In this case, things can be more readily disambiguated by the user inserting additional whitespace. We therefore could potentially continue to parse `x+/y/+z` as a binary operator chain, and require additional whitespace to interpret `/y/` as a regex literal. However, depending on the source compatibility impact, for consistency with the above proposed deprecation of prefix and postfix operators containing `/`, it may be prudent to also deprecate infix operators containing `/`. This would let us have a consistent rule, and would simplify the parsing logic required. Note though this deprecation would not affect the existing division operator `/`.

Author: Ah whoops it's totally not possible to deprecate infix operators containing `/` as we have the `/=` operator...

## Future Directions

### Typed captures

Typed captures would statically represent how many captures and of what kind are present in a regex literals. They could produce a `Substring` for a regular capture, `Substring?` for a zero-or-one capture, and  `Array<Substring>` (or a lazy collection) for a zero(or one)-or-more capture. These are worth exploring, especially in the context of the [start of variadic generics][variadics] support, but are outside the scope of this pitch.

### Raw regex literals

Similar to raw string literals `#"I said "hello there""#`, we may allow additional `#` characters to be added to the regex literal delimiters to allow for easy escaping of the `/` character within the literal, e.g:

```swift
#/foo/bar/baz/#
```

This is outside of the scope of this pitch, but would make sense as an additive proposal to regex literals.

### Further extension to Swift language constructs (better name?)

TODO: I'm referring to things like a Regex-backed `enum` for declaring tokens.

TODO: Mention restructuring pattern-matching enhancements

### Semantic details

> Further details about the semantics of regex literals, such as what definition we give to character classes, the initial supported feature set, and how to switch between grapheme-semantic and scalar-semantic usage, is outside the scope of this pitch and worthy of their own discussions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further details about the semantics of regex literals, such as what definition we give to character classes, the initial supported feature set, and how to switch between grapheme-semantic and scalar-semantic usage, is still under investigation and outside the scope of this pitch.
```

### Using a different delimiter to `/`

As explored above, using `/` as the delimiter has the potential to conflict with existing operators using that character, and may necessitate:

- Changing of parsing rules around chained `/` over multiple lines
- Deprecating custom operators containing the `/` character (not including the division operator) 
- Requiring a new language version mode to parse the literal with `/` delimiters

However one of the main goals of this pitch is to introduce a familiar syntax for regular expression literals, which has been the motivation behind e.g using the PCRE regex syntax. Given the fact that `/` is an existing term of art for regular expressions, we feel that if the aforementioned parsing issues can be solved in a satisfactory manner, we should prefer it as the delimiter.

### Raku-style syntax

TODO: rejected as we want familiarity. If we're going to do something custom or different, then we'd like to design something beyond regex. At that point, we're talking about something pretty different (and certainly not tied to strings, e.g. data processing literals), and this word does not preclude improvements there.

### Fully custom literals

> It may be worth exploring the ability for users to define custom literals, where they have full generality and no default type. This would require fleshing out the library-driven compilation story (bootstrapping as well as compiler and type system API). However that it is mostly orthogonal to this effort.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It may be worth exploring the ability for users to define custom literals, where they have full generality and no default type. This would require fleshing out the library-driven compilation story (bootstrapping as well as compiler and type system API). However that it is mostly orthogonal to this effort.
```

And I think I want to address partially-custom delimiters in some fashion as well.

This is a component of a larger string processing picture. We would like to start a focused discussion surrounding our approach to the literal itself, while acknowledging that evaluating the utility of the literal will ultimately depend on the whole picture (e.g. supporting API). To aid this focused discussion, details such as the representation of captures in the type system, semantic details, extensions to lexing/parsing, additional API, etc., are out of scope of this pitch and thread. Feel free to continue discussion of anything related in the [overview thread][overview].

## Motivation

Regular expressions are a ubiquitous, familiar, and concise syntax for matching and extracting text that satisfies a particular pattern. Syntactically, a regex literal in Swift should:

- Be familiar and facilitate knowledge reuse
- Fit in with Swift's library extensibility story for literals

Further motivation, examples, and discussion can be found in the [overview thread][overview].

## Proposed Solution

> We propose the introduction of a regular expression literal that supports [the PCRE syntax][PCRE], in addition to new standard library protocols `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` and `RegexLiteralProtocol` that allow for the customization of how the regex literal is interpreted (similar to [string interpolation][stringinterpolation]). The compiler will parse the PCRE syntax within a regex literal, and synthesize calls to corresponding builder methods. Types conforming to `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` will be able to provide a builder type that opts into supporting various regex constructs through the use of normal function declarations and `@available`.

Reviewer 3: Could we also support UTS#18? http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr18/

AFAIK PCRE doesn't support all of that, but it'd be good if we could at least parse it.

Reviewer 2: Let's continue talk about TR18 syntax on the thread

The compiler will then transform the literal into a set of builder calls that may be customized by adopting the `ExpressibleByRegexLiteral` protocol. Below is a straw-person transformation of this example: 

```swift
// let regex = /([[:alpha:]]\w*) = ([0-9A-F]+)/
let regex = {
  var builder = T.RegexLiteral()

  // __A4 = /([[:alpha:]]\w*)/
  let __A1 = builder.posixCharacterClassAlpha()
  let __A2 = builder.characterClassWord()
  let __A3 = builder.concatenate(__A1, __A2)
  let __A4 = builder.captureGroup(__A3)

  // __B1 = / = /
  let __B1 = builder.literal(" = ")

  // __C3 = /([0-9A-F]+)/
  let __C1 = builder.customCharacterClass(["0"..."9", "A"..."F"])
  let __C2 = builder.oneOrMore(__C1)
  let __C3 = builder.captureGroup(__C2)

  let __D1 = builder.concatenate(__A4, __B1, __C3)
  return T(regexLiteral: builder.finalize(__D1))
}()

> ```

Reviewer 4: This might be premature, but I have Thoughts.

1. We are both calling methods on a mutable builder instance, *and* returning values that are passed to later methods. So is the model here based on the methods mutating the builder to accumulate match operations into it, or is it based on the methods constructing an immutable value-type AST from the bottom up, or is it somehow both? (Maybe `builder` is a context that the AST nodes can be made in, but the relationship between those nodes is expressed by the return values? In that case, the initializer should probably be given some estimate information, much like `StringInterpolationProtocol`.)

2. If these methods are making AST nodes, should the method names indicate this? Perhaps by following the general `makeFoo` convention, or the result builder `buildFoo` convention? On the other hand, if they are having side effects on the builder, should they have verb-y names like `appendFoo` as we see in `StringInterpolationProtocol`?

3. Do we want to name metacharacters' methods based on specific semantics they're expected to follow? It might be better to have more mechanical translation rules, like:

> `\<identifier character>` turns into `makeEscaped_<identifier character>()` (except for characters that Swift string literals already assign a meaning to).

So for instance, the `__A2` line would be `let __A2 = builder.makeEscaped_w()`. That would free us from actually baking in a semantic for each character at this level, and would give us a consistent answer for characters that are used for different things in different dialects or aren't used in any of the dialects we know of. I also suspect it would be easier to remember than a lot of alternatives.

4. In `StringInterpolationProtocol`, I found that I didn't need a `finalize` because `init(stringInterpolation:)` could express any finalization logic I might need. The same might be true here.

Reviewer: I do think these details @beccadax calls out are worth focusing on in this pitch. IIUC they're the protocol informal requirements and as such are more part of the literal than the concrete conforming `Regex` type we'll eventually provide.

### Opting into certain regex features

We intend for the compiler to completely parse [the PCRE syntax][PCRE]. However, types conforming to `RegexLiteralProtocol` might not be able to handle the full feature set. The compiler looks for corresponding function declarations inside `RegexLiteralProtocol` and will emit a compilation error if missing. Conforming types can use `@available` on these function declarations to communicate versioning and add more support in the future.

This approach of lookup combined with availability allows the stdlib to support more features over time.

### Impact of using `/` as the delimiter

#### On comment syntax

Single line comments use the syntax `//`, which would conflict with the spelling for an empty regex literal. As such, an empty regex literal would be forbidden.

Multi-line comments use the `/*` delimiter. As such, a regex literal starting with `*` wouldn't be parsed. This however isn't a major issue as an unqualified `*` is already invalid regex syntax. An escaped `/\*/` regex literal wouldn't be impacted.

> 

Reviewer 4: A third comment issue that might be worth discussing: If we wanted to support multi-line regex literals, the most natural way to do that given current Swift syntax would be:

```
let regex = ///
            pattern
            ///
```

However, `///` is a comment syntax, and specifically it's the documentation comment syntax. Do we want to rule out this feature, or do we think there's a heuristic we can use to rescue it?

Reviewer 4: (Someone on the overall pitch thread pointed this out—can't remember who, but you may want to give credit.)

This is also potentially an issue for result builders, for example:

```swift
SomeBuilder {
  x
  / y /
  z
}
```

Today this is parsed as `SomeBuilder { x / y / z }`, however it's likely the user was expecting this to become a result builder with 3 elements, the second of which being a regex literal.

There is currently no source compatibility impact as both cases will continue to parse as binary operations. The user may insert a `;` on the prior line to get the desired regex literal parsing. However this may not be sufficient we may need to change parsing rules (under a version check) to favor parsing regex literals in these cases. We'd like to discuss this further with the community.

It's worth noting that this is similar to an ambiguity that already exists today with trailing closures, for example:

```swift
SomeBuilder {
  SomeType()
  { print("hello") }
  AnotherType()
}
```

> `{ print("hello") }` will be parsed as a trailing closure to `SomeType()` rather than as a separate element to the result builder.

Reviewer 4: There's an even better analogy here to leading-dot syntax, which therefore isn't supported at the top level of a statement in a result builder.

# Regular Expression Literals

- Authors: Hamish Knight, Michael Ilseman

## Introduction

We propose to introduce a first-class regular expression literal into the language that can take advantage of library support to offer extensible, powerful, and familiar textual pattern matching.

This is a component of a larger string processing picture. We would like to start a focused discussion surrounding our approach to the literal itself, while acknowledging that evaluating the utility of the literal will ultimately depend on the whole picture (e.g. supporting API). To aid this focused discussion, details such as the representation of captures in the type system, semantic details, extensions to lexing/parsing, additional API, etc., are out of scope of this pitch and thread. Feel free to continue discussion of anything related in the [overview thread][overview].

## Motivation

Regular expressions are a ubiquitous, familiar, and concise syntax for matching and extracting text that satisfies a particular pattern. Syntactically, a regex literal in Swift should:

> - Be familiar and facilitate knowledge reuse
> - Fit in with Swift's library extensibility story for literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be familiar and facilitate knowledge reuse
- Facilitate some reuse of existing regexs (e.g. found on StackOverflow)
- Fit in with Swift's library extensibility story for literals
```

I think we could add one more bullet here about facilitating re-use of actual regexs and not just knowledge... also 3 is the magic number for number of bullets.

Reviewer: Agreed, these goals from @beccadax are great!

Fully-custom literal support, that is literals whose bodies are not parsed and there is no default type available, is orthogonal to this work. It would require support for compilation-time Swift libraries in addition to Swift APIs for the compiler and type system.

### Further extension to Swift language constructs

Other language constructs, such as raw-valued enums, might benefit from further regex enhancements.

```swift
enum CalculatorToken: Regex {
  case wholeNumber = /\d+/
  case identifier = /\w+/
  case symbol = /\p{Math}/
  ...
}
```

As mentioned in the overview, general purpose extensions to Swift (syntactic) pattern matching could benefit regex

```swift
func parseField(_ field: String) -> ParsedField {
  switch field {
  case let text <- /#\s?(.*)/:
    return .comment(text)
  case let (l, u) <- /([0-9A-F]+)(?:\.\.([0-9A-F]+))?/:
    return .scalars(Unicode.Scalar(hex: l) ... Unicode.Scalar(hex: u ?? l))
  case let prop <- GraphemeBreakProperty.init:
    return .property(prop)
  }
}
```

> We'd like more community feedback on these future directions.

Reviewer: Do we actually want community feedback on these directions in this thread? Seem like that'd be better left for the overview thread.

Regular expressions are a ubiquitous, familiar, and concise syntax for matching and extracting text that satisfies a particular pattern. Syntactically, a regex literal in Swift should:

- Support a syntax familiar to developers who have learned to use regular expressions in other tools and languages
- Allow reuse of many regular expressions not specifically designed for Swift (e.g. from Stack Overflow or popular programming books)
- Allow libraries to define custom types that can be constructed with regex literals, much like string literals

> - Diagnose at compile time if a regex literal uses capabilities that aren't allowed by the type's regex dialect

Reviewer 2: Nice! Thanks @beccadax

Single line comments use the syntax `//`, which would conflict with the spelling for an empty regex literal. As such, an empty regex literal would be forbidden.

> While not conflicting with the syntax proposed in this pitch, it's also worth noting that the `//` comment syntax (in particular documentation comments that use `///`) would likely preclude the ability to use `///` as a delimiter if we ever wanted to support multi-line regex literals. It's possible though that future multi-line support could be inferred from the regex options provided. For example, a regex that uses the multi-line option `/(?m)/` could be allowed to span multiple lines.

Reviewer 2: Does that mean that the parser would understand `(?m)` and switch behavior or heuristics?

Also, raw regex literals give us a future route here too.
